# mobile-app-final

### Problem
Dungeons and Dragons is a game that people have been playing since 1974, and during its extensive tenure, it has been played almost exclusively played with pen-and-paper. With advances in technology, it no longer makes the most sense to play with pen-and-paper, unless that’s just what you prefer. While some people do enjoy the feel of a piece (or several pieces) of paper under their pen, other people really prefer to not bog their games down with a bunch of math and thinking (other than imagining all of your amazing adventures, that is). Due to this aversion to math that some people have, it follows that a companion application to Dungeons and Dragons that has the math abstracted from it might be something worth making. That is what we have set out to do. 

In doing so, we hope to make the processes of character creation (one of the more math-heavy parts of the game), inventory management, combat, and role-playing feel less like homework, and more like an actual game. 

### Analysis (study, research) 
From the paper-prototyping that we went through with the rest of the class, we found that the UI was a very important (and hard-to-master) element of designing and implementing this application. Since the whole point of the app is to display pieces of information in a way that clearly confers what each thing is to the user. One large issue is that, when a person who has never played Dungeons and Dragons looks at a character sheet, no matter who they are, they most likely won’t know what they’re looking at. In the end it was decided that, while we would do our best to make things as clear as possible, the only people who will really understand what each application component is doing are people who have played Dungeons and Dragons before. Our main issue with the paper-prototyping was that people didn’t know what they were looking at, even after being clued into the fact that it’s for D&D.  

### Design (prototyping, algorithms, system design)
The nice thing about the calculations in Dungeons and Dragons is that many involve formulas, making a few parts of the code easier to write. One such formula is that for deriving the Ability Modifier from the Ability Score. In pen-and-paper Dungeons and Dragons, players roll 6 Ability Scores and assign each of those scores to an Ability. In our app, the Ability Score rolling is done as well as the Ability Modifier calculation. The formula for calculating an Ability Modifier, which is used when rolling for things like skill checks and attacks, is the floor of ((score2) - 5). Having this abstracted from the Player makes the game less time-consuming overall, especially if a person likes to create characters for fun, which can take a large amount of math. 

One thing that was, unfortunately, outside of the scope of what we had time to complete for this project, but would be essential for a real production-level D&D 5e application, is the ability to level up characters, or to gain any experience in general. There are several thing that change when a character levels up, and many things that the user can change and choose so that their character grows in a way that fits with their narrative and is what the user wants. Due to the plethora of choices and options that are involved in leveling up, this has been omitted from our version of the app. 

### Implementation: (APIs, tools used) 
Dungeons and Dragons involves, as has been stated already, lots of math. It also involves a severe amount of data. For this reason, we have used an SQL database to store and access player information. This allows for users to create characters, giving them spells, weapons, gold, and other things that any good D&D character should have, without having to write any of the information down. The app doesn't require any permissions to run. Internet isn’t used at all. 
The dual hamburger bar buttons were designed by first creating a custom toolbar. The custom toolbar can be modified similar to any other layout. The custom toolbar and side menus were then put together in one layout using the” include” tags. By doing so a developer simply needs to include one extra xml layout file in any layout file they’re designing. In the onCreate function call of any activity using this custom toolbar the function must create a new instance of the drawerFunctions class. This class contains functions for every action needed in the custom toolbar and hamburger buttons. Because there are two hamburger bar menus the default android functions don't work. Everytime the hamburger bar is pressed a reorganizing of the main content displayed and the menus has to be done. The menus are brought to the front and main content sent to the back and vice versa. 
	In the combat activity, the circular HP bar is a custom drawable, as Android only has horizontal progress bars. 

### Instructions
To begin using the application (after opening it, of course), click on the left hamburger bar to open the character menu, and then select “Character Creation”. This will bring up a screen where you enter all of the starting information for your character (name, amount of experience, race, class, etc). Six rolls are provided for you next to where you can enter your ability scores, so that you can use those if you’d like, or roll your own dice in real life, if you prefer creating characters in that way (as many people do). Be careful to enter information for all of the fields, as you won’t be able to confirm the character before all fields have been filled out.

Once you’ve created your character, you can open the left hamburger bar to view your inventory and spell sheets. In these, you can add the spells, weapons, items, and gold that your character starts with, and also add more spells and gold as you level up and grow as a player. In the right-side hamburger bar, you can find all of the skills that you would want to roll at any given time. If you click on one of these, the rolling page will be brought up (the rolling page can also be brought up using the Floating Action Button in the bottom right corner of the screen). This will display the # dice that has been rolled (a d20 if you’re trying to roll a skill check), and then the number that you use for the skill check based on the appropriate modifier for your character. For example, if your character is a level 1 Barbarian with 20 Strength, and you roll an Athletics check, the application will roll a d20, and then add your +5 modifier to the rolled result. On this page, you can also roll any number of any kind of (real life) dice, with Advantage or Disadvantage, as necessary. 

The last part of the application is the combat section. This allows for players to use those spells and items that they’ve put into the database to attack, or otherwise affect other players or Non Player Characters in the game. Players can roll weapon/spell damage, add or remove Health Points, and see all of the information that they might need to during combat (Character speed, health, Armor Class, etc). After having added weapons to your inventory, you can see them appear on the Combat screen and, by clicking the die button on the right side of the weapon card, you can roll weapon damage straight from that screen. The three symbols for weapons in the Combat section are a shield, representing mundane (non-magical) weapons, a flaming sword representing magical weapons, and a fireball (one of the more commonly used spells, especially for beginners) for spells that do damage. On this page you can also keep track of the successes and failures on Death Saves.
